Welcome back to the course, in this lecture we
will learn about Prim's algorithm, an algorithm
that is used to find the minimum spanning tree
of a graph. Okay imagine that we have this graph,
it's the example used in the Wikipedia
article about minimum spanning trees.
Now we want to build its minimum spanning tree.
Let's start from an arbitrary vertex, let's say A.
We know that at the end all vertices will
be included in the mst so we can choose any
vertex to start with. Now you have to visualize
the graph G as two components, the first one is
the one that contains vertices of our mst, and
the second one contains remaining vertices.
The minimum spanning tree is connected so
we have to connect these two components.
Right now, the first component contains A only,
and the second one contains all other vertices.
How to connect these two components? We have
three choices, we can either use the edge AB,
the edge AC, or the edge AF. We want
the spanning tree with the minimum cost,
so we take the edge with the smallest weight,
AC. Now same thing again, we have two components,
the first contains vertices in our mst, A and C,
and the second one contains remaining vertices.
We have to connect them. We have 6 choices,
using the edge AB, AF, CB, CD, CE, and CF. The
edge with the smallest weight is CD, we take it,
we added a new edge and a new vertex to our mst.
Then again, two components, one contains A, C, and
D, and the other one contains remaining vertices,
B E F G H I J. Now try to find how to connect
them. To connect them, we have previous ways,
but we also discovered new ones by adding
D, we can now also use edges DB, DG, and DE.
The shortest one is DB, we take it. We
discovered a new way to connect, the edge BG.
We need to connect the component
ACDB with the component FEGHIJ.
We have multiple available edges, edges that we
can take to extend our minimum spanning tree,
we have AB, BC, BG, DG, DE, CE, CF, and AF. The
shortest one is BC. But, B and C are already in
our mst, already in our first component, so it
won't extend our mst, we don't take the edge.
Also, taking it would create a cycle,
it doesn't even become a tree anymore.
The next shortest is AB, but same thing, we
already took A and B, we ignore the edge.
Next shortest is DE, we take it, and
we discover new edges, EG, EI, EJ, EF.
Shortest one is EG, we take it, and
we discover new ways, GH and GI.
Here we can notice a pattern in the way we're
working, what we're doing is that while we didn't
get our full mst, at each iteration, we search
for the shortest available edge. And if it doesn't
lead to a vertex that is already in our mst, then
we will extend our mst, we add the end vertex to
our mst. And we traverse its neighbors to see if
we discover edges that we can take from now on.
We keep repeating until we build the whole mst.
Let's continue where we stopped. Shortest edge
is now GH, and H is not in our MST, we
take it and we discover edges HI and HJ.
Next iteration, shortest edge is HI, we add it to
our mst, and we discover IJ. Then we have the edge
IJ, we add it, and we discover JF. Then we have
the edge HJ, but both are in the mst, we skip.
Then we have the edge GI, but both are in the
mst, we skip. Then we have the edge EF, F is
not in the mst, we take it and we discover no new
edges. All vertices have been added to our mst,
so we stop here, useless to continue, we got our
minimum spanning tree by using Prim's algorithm.
And this is the idea of Prim's algorithm, at the
beginning we create a graph that will be our mst,
we select an arbitrary vertex, we add its edges
to a list of available, then we start iterating.
While we didn't add all vertices to our mst, we
select the edge (u,v) with the minimum weight
from the list of available edges, ones that
we discovered before. If v, the destination,
is not in our mst, then we have an
extension, we add the edge (u,v) to our mst.
And we traverse edges of the vertex v,
if the neighbor z is not in our mst,
it means that we discovered a new edge, we add
the edge (v,z) to our list of available edges.
After the loop, we return mst. You
can notice that at each iteration,
we're choosing the smallest possible edge, it's
what makes Prim's algorithm a greedy algorithm,
we're taking the best local choice at each
iteration in hope to get the best global result.
You can understand this algorithm as a monster
that starts as a single vertex, then it keeps
growing by always eating the shortest route
that leads to vertices he didn't eat yet.
Okay now we know how Prim's algorithm works,
but how to implement it? The crucial point
of implementing Prim's algorithm is the choice of
the data structure we use for the available edges.
We need a structure capable of doing two
things, inserting elements, in our case edges,
and extracting the element with the minimum
value, in our case the minimum weight.
The perfect structure for this is
the priority queue, it's a queue
where elements have a priority, and we can
extract the element with the highest priority,
in our case the smallest weight, we
worked with it in Dijkstra's algorithm.
But the priority queue is an abstract data
type, we can have different implementations.
We've seen before in this course that using a
sorted array is slow, it's better to use a heap.
Let's try with the binary heap. Let's implement
the solution then move to time complexity.
We create a graph named mst, we create a binary
heap available, it will store available edges,
and we choose an arbitrary vertex as start. Now
we traverse neighbors of start to add edges to the
queue. For each edge from start to v with a weight
w, we add the tuple (w, start, v) to the queue.
We've put w at the beginning because tuples
are compared starting from their first element,
and because we want to compare edges with
their weight, we put it as first element.
We also put u and v to know the incident
vertices when extracting an edge.
Then while our mst doesn't contain all
vertices, we keep looping. At each iteration,
we extract the edge with the smallest weight,
and we put its elements in 3 variables w, u, v.
Now we take the edge into consideration only
if it's doesn't connect 2 vertices that are
already in our mst, this is why we check that
v is not in mst. If the condition is true,
we add the undirected edge to our mst, (v, w)
to neighbors of u and (u, w) to neighbors of v.
Last thing to do, we need to traverse neighbors
v. For each edge from v to z with a weight w,
if z is not in the mst, then we have a
potential edge, we add it to the queue,
with the weight as the first element
obviously. After the loop, we return the MST.
Let's measure its time complexity. Inserting
an element in a binary heap is in O(logn) time.
Inserting n elements in the binary heap is in O(n)
time not O(nlogn), we proved it in the YouTube
video I suggested in Dijkstra's algorithm lecture.
And extracting an element costs O(logn) time.
Here we have at most |V| elements to insert
at the beginning, neighbors of start vertex,
the cost is |V|. Then we have a loop that does
at most |E| iterations, it's traversing edges.
Inside it we extract_min, O(logn) time, and here
n is |E| because we store edges in the structure,
the cost is log|E|. We also have an
inner loop that does deg(v) iterations,
where we insert an element, done in O(logn) time,
log|E| here. The sum of degrees is 2|E|, so
in total we have |V| + |E|log|E| + 2|E|log|E|,
which is in O(|E|log|E|) time. We're dealing
with a simple graph, so |E| is smaller or
equal than |V|². Which implies that log(|E|) <=
log(|V|²), which implies that log|E| <= 2log|V|,
so we can replace log|E| by log|V|, we
get an O(|E|log|V|) time complexity.
We can still optimize it. And for that, we will
have a different approach for Prim's algorithm.
In the outer loop, we're extracting one edge
at a time, this is why we can have at most
|E| iterations. In this new approach, instead
of extracting edges, we will extract vertices,
so we will have at most |V| iterations,
which is usually way smaller than |E|.
For edges, we were extracting the available
edge with the smallest weight, but for vertices,
what vertex do we extract? We extract the
vertex that requires the smallest cost to
go to from our actual minimum spanning
tree. Let's try it with our previous
example. Here also we have an arbitrary
vertex to start from, let's choose A.
To be sure that it will be selected, we set its
cost to 0, and all remaining ones to infinity.
The algorithm starts, A gets selected.
Now we have A in our mst, and from here we have
3 newly discovered edges that we can take to
connect more vertices. And these new edges may
reduce the cost for some vertices, let's see.
We have the edge AB. The cost of B was infinity,
but with this edge the cost is lower, it's 6,
so we decrease the cost of B to 6. We also
have the edge AC. The cost of C was infinity,
but with this edge the cost is lower, it's 3,
we decrease the cost of C to 3. And we have
the edge AF. The cost of F was infinity, but with
this edge the cost is lower, it's 9, we decrease.
Next iteration, what is the cheapest vertex that
is not in our mst? It's the vertex C, we go to it.
But wait, the hard thing when building the mst
is not finding what vertices to include, because
they will all be included at the end anyway, the
hard thing is to figure out what edges to include.
So here, we shouldn't just save
C, we should save the edge (A,C).
When we were extracting edges, it was easy to do,
we knew what were the source and the destination,
while here, we extracted the vertex C only, the
destination. But how would we know the source,
how would we know that we should include the
edge (A,C) and not (B,C) or (E,C) for example.
To fix this problem, in addition to the minimum
cost of each vertex, we should also save its
parent, the vertex that decreased its cost. In
this case, we should have saved A as the parent
of C, so that when we extract C, we know that we
should include the edge (A,C). So when working,
every time a vertex u decreases the cost of a
vertex v, we update by putting u as the parent
of v, so that when we extract v, we know that
the edge we include should be the edge (u,v).
Let's start over by taking
this detail into consideration.
At the beginning, all vertices parents are null,
because we don't know even one way to go to them.
We start by extracting A. Edges it discovers
are AB, AC, and AF. AB decreases the cost of B,
and we don't forget to set A as the parent of B.
Then same thing for AC. And same thing for AF.
Next iteration, cheapest vertex is C. And
here, we know that the vertex who gave it
the cheapest cost was A, so we add the edge
(A,C). Then C discovers new edges, CB, CD,
CE, and CF, let's see if they decrease
costs of some vertices. The weight of CB
is 4 while the actual cost of B is 6, so it gets
decreased to 4, and we set C as the parent of B.
It means that before, the minimum cost to make
a connection from our mst to B was 6, but now,
we found a cheaper way for connecting it, with a
cost of 4 instead of 6, this is why we decreased.
CD, cost is 2 while cost of D is infinity, it
surely decreases, we also set C as the parent
of D. CE, cost is 9 while cost of E is infinity,
it surely decreases, C becomes the parent of E.
And CF, cost is 9 while cost of
F is already 9, nothing changes.
Next iteration, the cheapest vertex is
D, with a cost of 2, and its parent is C,
we include the edge (C,D). We discover DB,
DG, and DE. DB, it decreases the cost to 2,
D becomes the parent of B. DG, it decreases
the cost to 9. DE, it decreases the cost to 8.
Next vertex to extract is B. By the way,
when I'm showing an example in detail to
see how the algorithm works, as soon as
you think that you understood the process,
try to pause the video and continue the example
by yourself, to see if you really understood,
you can also start writing code before
you see the one presented in the lecture.
We said that next vertex to extract is B. It
has edges BA, BC, BD, and BG. But we ignore BA
BC and BD because all destinations are already
visited. For BG, it doesn't decrease the cost.
Next extracted vertex is E. New edges are EG, EI,
EJ, and EF. EG, it decreases the cost to 7. EI,
it decreases the cost to 9. EJ, it decreases the
cost to 10. And EF, it decreases the cost to 8.
Next extracted vertex is G, it has the lowest cost
among remaining vertices. It discovers GH and GI.
GH, it decreases the cost to 4. GI, it decreases
the cost to 5. Then we have the vertex H,
it discovers HI and HJ. HI, it decreases the
cost to 1. And HJ, it decreases the cost to 4.
Next vertex is I, it discovers IJ, it decreases
the cost of J to 3, and it becomes its parent.
Next vertex is J, it discovers JF,
but it doesn't decrease its cost.
And last vertex is F, with a cost of 8, its
parent is E, we add in MST the edge (E, F).
And we got our mst by extracting
vertices instead of edges.
Okay we've seen an example, but we need some
pseudocode to understand. We create our mst,
our available structure, our start vertex, and
now we need to put our vertices in available.
For each one of them, we set its cost to
0 if it's the start vertex, else infinity,
as we did at the beginning. We set its parent
to null, and we insert it in available.
We can start, while we didn't make the full mst,
we extract the vertex with the minimum cost.
If it's the start vertex, there's no edge
to add, we still don't have an edge to add.
But if it's not the case, we add the
edge from the parent of u to u itself,
for example C had A as a parent when extracted, so
we added the edge (A,C). This is why we get a tree
of |V|-1 vertices, the -1 comes from the fact that
start vertex doesn't need an edge to include it.
Let's continue. Now we need to traverse neighbors
of u to see if it decreases their
cost, by checking weights of edges.
For each edge from u to v with a weight of w,
we check two conditions. If v is not in the mst
yet and w is smaller than its actual cost, then
we found a cheaper way to go to v, we go to it
from the actual vertex u, this is why the cost
of v becomes w, and the parent of v becomes u.
Also, because the key of v changed, which is
its cost, we need to update it in the heap,
with the decrease key function.
After the loop, we return mst.
This Prim's algorithm approach kinda
reminds us of Dijkstra's algorithm.
What about the implementation? Let's
keep our choice: using a binary heap.
But wait, without even implementing, just by
analyzing the pseudocode, we can notice a problem.
Remember that the binary heap has a time
complexity of O(logn) for decrease key operation.
We have |V| to build the heap, then a
loop that does |V| iterations this time,
extract min costs log|V| because
we have at most |V| vertices.
We also have a loop that does deg(u)
iterations, inside it we're decreasing
the key of a node in the heap, which costs
O(logn) as mentioned earlier, here n is |V|.
The sum of degrees is 2|E|, so in
total we get |V|+|V|log|V|+2|E|log|V|,
which is in O(|E|log|V|) time,
same as the previous approach.
With a binary heap, we get
the same time complexity,
but to get a better time complexity,
we will implement the priority queue
with another data structure that we've seen
before in this course: the Fibonacci heap.
Building a Fibonacci heap of n elements is in
O(n) time. Inserting an element is in O(1) time.
Extracting minimum is in O(logn) time amortized.
And decrease key is in O(1) time amortized.
This is why we get, as you can see, a
time complexity of O(|E|+|V|log|V|).
Let's move to the implementation, and we will the
use fibheap Python module. You will see that the
code will look like the one we wrote to implement
Dijkstra's algorithm with a Fibonacci heap.
We create mst, we create our start vertex,
we create cost map, we create parent map, we
create nodes map to map each vertex label to its
node in the heap, and we create a Fibonacci heap.
Now for each vertex u, we need to initialize
its information in cost and parent,
and create its node. So we start by calculating
the cost, 0 if u is start, else infinity,
we assign the result to cost[u].
We also set parent[u] to null.
We also create a node whose key is the tuple
(cost[u], u), same logic as for Dijkstra's,
cost[u] at the beginning to compare and u to know
what vertex we're working with when extracting.
We assign it to nodes[u], and we put it in
our Fibonacci heap. Now we can start working.
While we didn't make the full mst, in other words,
while we still have vertices not in the mst,
we extract a node. To get the label of its
associated vertex, we can find it in the
second element of its key, remember that its key
is the tuple (cost[u], u). Then if u is not start,
we insert the edge between u and its parent,
by keeping its weight, which is cost[u].
For that we add (parent[u], cost[u]) to neighbors
of u and (u, cost[u]) to neighbors of parent[u].
Last step, we traverse neighbors to see if it
decreases cost. For each edge from u to v and with
a weight w, if v isn't included in the mst yet and
w is smaller than the actual cost of v, we update.
We update by assigning w to cost[v], assigning u
to parent[v], and decreasing the key of the vertex
v, by putting the tuple (cost[v], v), again,
cost for comparing and v for knowing what vertex.
You can see that in decrease_key we passed
the node associated with the label v.
After the loop, we return mst. And we
implemented Prim's algorithm by using a
Fibonacci heap, which gives a time complexity of
O(|E|+|V|log|V|), better than what we got before.
Especially if the graph is dense, where |E| is
much higher than |V|. We've reached the end of
this lecture, I hope that you now understand
Prim's algorithm and its implementation.
See you in the next lecture to discuss
another MST algorithm: Kruskal's algorithm.